JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle to
dislodge ISIS from its makeshift
capital, Raqqa, in Syria
is intensifying, as U.S.-backed
militia press the offensive.
But, for years, a group of
citizen journalists have
documented life inside the city.
Their work started when the
uprising began in 2011 against
Syria's president, Bashar
al-Assad.
And it continues today
under even more deadly and
dangerous circumstances.
Jeffrey Brown has their story.
JEFFREY BROWN: They call
themselves Raqqa is Being
Slaughtered Silently.
And last year, the Committee to
Protect Journalists awarded the
group its International Press
Freedom Award.
Their story is now
told in a documentary
titled "City of Ghosts."
And joining me is the film's
director, Matthew Heineman,
and Abdul-Aziz al-Hamza, one of
the group's members.
Welcome to both of you.
ABDUL-AZIZ AL-HAMZA,
Raqqa is Being Slaughtered
Silently: Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Aziz, I want
to -- you and your friends and
colleagues are not fighters.
You were not journalists
before all of this started.
In your own words, what are you?
How do you describe yourselves?
ABDUL-AZIZ AL-HAMZA: Before the
Syrian revolution, before all
what happened in Syria, I was a
normal teenager who was
studying biochemistry.
So I had nothing to
do with politics.
Even my family had like
no political background.
So I was as any college
student anywhere.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then, when
this started, you and your
friends felt you had to document
it.
ABDUL-AZIZ AL-HAMZA: The way
how the Syrian regime and ISIS
prevented the international
media organizations to come and
cover what's going on, it was
like kind of a duty to cover
the atrocities of both of them.
So we decided first with
our mobile phones to
film the demonstrations.
At our own, we developed
our skills to document
what the human rights
violations against the
people.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Matthew,
many stories are told about
Syria, why was this the one you
wanted to tell?
MATTHEW HEINEMAN, Director,
"City of Ghosts": You know, I
was really fascinated by this
war of ideas, this war of
propaganda, this information
war between ISIS on one hand and
RBSS on the other.
ISIS uses these slick,
almost Hollywood-style
videos to disseminate
fear across the world
and to attract followers
and proclaim a safe haven,
a paradise for Muslims.
RBSS and the work of
Aziz and his colleagues
totally counter that and
show the extraordinarily
awful human rights violations
that they're committing
almost on a daily basis.
And, you know, that's what
initially drew me to the film,
but the film became much more
than that to me.
It became a -- ultimately, it
became a story of them fleeing,
being forced to flee from
Syria, to Turkey,
and Turkey to Europe.
It became an immigrant story.
It became a story of rising
nationalism in Europe.
It became a story about trauma
and the cumulative effects of
trauma, so it became much more
than that.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, let's
take a look at a clip that
shows a little bit of the work
of your group.
MAN: We are made up
to have two groups.
The internal group is in
Raqqa and is made up of
around 17 correspondents.
The internal group's mission
is to film, photograph
and deliver urgent news.
The primary mission
of the external term
group is to communicate
with the group inside.
MAN (through translator):
Rashidi, go to the door.
A girl is going to
bring you stuff.
She is wearing a
deep red head scarf.
MAN: The internal group then
sends us the information.
MAN (through translator):
There's a big airstrike
in the north from our
correspondent Iyan Issa
(ph).
MAN: We, the external group,
then distribute it to the world.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Aziz, the
film mostly, necessarily,
spends its time with you and
your colleagues who
are outside Raqqa.
But those who are inside,
who we just saw, how are
they able to do their work?
And what kind of
dangers do they face?
ABDUL-AZIZ AL-HAMZA: So, they
are like -- in every second
and every moment they are like
in a dangerous and
a risky situation.
So, they could be
killed by ISIS, the
airstrikes, the shelling.
But they are risking their
lives daily to show the
reality of what's going on.
JEFFREY BROWN: Matthew, you and
I talked about your last film,
which was really around the
border area in the U.S., and
the way you told that story,
sort of embedding yourself into
the violence.
This is a little different.
Tell me how you made this film.
MATTHEW HEINEMAN: Yes,
so this was a different
experience for me.
I was forced to -- I
wasn't able to go to Raqqa.
I would be killed instantly.
And so I started filming them
in Turkey after they were forced
to flee, after some of the
members of their
group were killed.
And the sort of through-line
of the film is basically me
with them as they are escaping
from safe house to safe house,
ultimately landing in Europe.
You know, I think these issues
of ISIS and Syria are so
often relegated to headlines
and to stats, and I
really wanted to put a
human face to this topic.
JEFFREY BROWN: What
is the situation now?
Of course, the battle for Raqqa
is going on, and we read about
airstrikes, civilians being
hurt.
What's the situation
for your colleagues?
ABDUL-AZIZ AL-HAMZA: For the
people of Raqqa, so they are
suffering not only by ISIS, by
the airstrike of the
international coalition.
At the same time, the
Russians are still bombing
the city, the Syrian regime.
So, everyone is like
bombing the city.
The local are besieged
between all these sides.
The condition is the city,
the services are like so bad.
Everything is getting
expensive day after day.
People are missing
like many things for
their necessary lives.
And many people were kind of
trying to flee the city, but
the land mines -- so it's a
horrible situation.
JEFFREY BROWN: With the outcome
in Raqqa still so uncertain,
do you know whether you will
be able to return or to
what kind of city you
will be able to return to?
ABDUL-AZIZ AL-HAMZA: I hope
that one day, I will be able
to return to Raqqa, to my city.
So that's the reason
why I started this group
with my colleagues, so
to fight for our city,
to be able one day to go
back and lead the rest of
our lives in Raqqa and Syria.
So, I don't want to be
like a fugitive anymore.
JEFFREY BROWN: Matthew,
what do you hope people take
from this, from your film?
MATTHEW HEINEMAN: Bombs
are not going to fix ISIS.
This ground war that
we're fighting is not
going to end ISIS.
ISIS is an idea.
And we have to fight
this idea with the same
tools that they're using.
And so I think, you know, we,
as a global community, we,
as the United States, we as
journalists, have to figure out
ways to combat ISIS' ideology,
ISIS' extremist ideology,
not just with guns and bombs,
but with words, with campaigns
like the amazing work that
this group is doing.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
new film is "City of Ghosts."
Matthew Heineman and
Abdul-Aziz al-Hamza,
thank you both very much.
MATTHEW HEINEMAN: Thank you.